PEDRO:
Hi, I'm Pedro Domingos. I'm a professor of
computer science at the University of Washington
in Seattle. I am an expert on AI and in particular
machine learning. I'm originally from Portugal,
got my PhD at UC Irvine back when hardly anybody
else was doing machine learning. This was in the
80s. I've done a whole bunch of things in this
field since. I've written a couple of books,
one called the Master Algorithm, introduced
machine learning to a broad audience,
turned into a surprise bestseller, and most
recently, 2040: A Silicon Valley Satire which,
as the name implies, is a satire of AI in the tech
industry and the politics and culture around it.
CRAIG:
Yeah, I enjoyed the book. It reminded
me a little bit– when I was in high school,
there was a book by a writer named Tom Robbins,
Even Cowgirls Get the Blues. It's kind of a crazy
satire with a lot of wild characters, but with an
underlying philosophical theme. I have a lot of
questions about the book, for listeners it's, at
a very high level about what happens when AI has
advanced to the point that we have an AI candidate
for president and all of the crazy things that
devolve from that. But without going into the plot
so much, the book is largely around the theme of
control,lack of control, and the danger of losing
control of AI. I understand this is a satire, but
for two years now that's been in the wind and I,
frankly, think it's exaggerated, those fears,
and I think regulation is moving along quickly,
maybe because of the noise made by the
research community, but it is moving along
quickly. It's satire, is it poking fun at those
concerns or, are you raising those concerns?
PEDRO:
Well, like all satire,
it has an underlying serious intent. So 2040
is not about 2040 any more than Animal Farm is
about animals or farming. It's about today; it's
about 2024. Like a lot of classic science fiction,
what it does is it extrapolates current trends to
the point of absurdity. The thing that's kind of
funny and maybe alarming in some ways is that a
lot of this stuff is not that far away. In fact,
a lot of people's reaction to the book is,
[yeah, this seems so far out and over the top,
and yet it's oddly realistic. Like, it could
happen any time]. In fact, I conceived of this
book a few years ago but then, I decided I really
need to publish this before it becomes outdated,
because so much of the stuff in it was coming
true. So it's a short, quick read but it actually
covers a lot of things. So every element of
the book is there for a reason. It's there
to illustrate something about today's world
of tech, AI, and whatnot. And as you say,
one of the key elements is what I think are the
misguided fears about AI versus the real ones. So
part of what the novel tries to illustrate with
PresiBot, who's this AI candidate for president,
just think ChatGPT runs for president, that's
basically what it really is– and you can already
see the jokes coming one after another, is that
the real danger is not Terminator or some evil AI
taking over and exterminating us, the real danger
is that the AI is imperfect. The AI screws up,
it hallucinates, it has bugs, it needs
fixed. The even bigger danger is that
the humans developing and trying to control
the AI are flawed humans, like we all are,
and they screw up. They get into conflicts and
disasters happen. Without giving any spoilers,
those disasters are the result of the interaction
of the flaws of the AI with the flaws and the
intentions of the various humans, which I think
is the real problem, and of course, what is always
the real problem with technology it’s just that on
AI it might be on a bigger scale than ever before.
CRAIG:
Yeah,
but where do you lie on that safety debate
between Geoff Hinton and I don't know–
PEDRO:
Yann LeCun.
CRAIG:
Yann LeCun,
yeah. They're the principles in much of the
debate. Where do you lie on that spectrum?
PEDRO:
I'm very much in agreement with Yann
on most of this and in disagreement with Geoff. I
have a lot of respect for Geoff as a researcher,
but as someone to take advice from about real
world issues, he's not the first person I would
turn to. In fact, he's very honest about it. He
says he never actually worried about any of these
AI alarmist scenarios until recently. It was only
when ChatGPT came out that he started thinking,
[Oh wow, superintelligence is almost here.
And then, [What is it going to do to us?]
I think he and a lot of other people like him,
they're making two mistakes, at least. One is
that superintelligence is not almost here by
any means. I think in the years since then,
it's become increasingly clear that this AI still
has a long way to go, number one. But number two,
and maybe less obvious but in the longer
term, more important, superintelligence is
no extinction danger to humanity. This
is a natural mistake that people make
by analogizing between AI and humans. The only
intelligence that we know is human intelligence,
animal intelligence. So once we see a computer
behaving in ways that seem intelligent, we can't
help but project onto the computer all sorts of
human characteristics that it just doesn't have,
like ambition, the will to power, emotions, and
consciousness etc, etc. None of this is there.
And it won't be there unless we put it there.
In particular, I think what we can, should,
and will do is we're going to develop AI, remember
AI is under our control, we're going to develop it
as an extension of our intelligence. It's not some
other creature that is going to come and attack
us. That is just a fantastical sci-fi scenario
that unfortunately, Hollywood has promoted heavily
because it makes for successful movies. People
think of Terminator when they think of AI. If
after reading the book, what they think of instead
is PresiBot, then it has already achieved its aim.
CRAIG:
Yeah. And the whole Terminator scenario–
because people talk to me about this all the time,
they're talking about embodied AI and they're
really talking about advanced robotics, which have
a really long way to go. There's some incredible
things happening and things have moved very
swiftly in the last year or two but it's going
to be a long time before you have a robot that can
navigate the the messiness of the world, let alone
take action in the world in a way that would
be threatening to humans; that's my view. The
question of superintelligence, there's a lot of
confusion, particularly in the public space about
that because, there is a lot of superintelligence
already in AI. It's not this monolithic thing that
we're going to reach someday, I think, where
suddenly you wake up one morning and there's
this AI system that's infected the internet and
it's smarter than humans. I hear this from AI
researchers in the alarmist camp. You know, “It'll
be smarter than you. You won't be able to stop it
because it'll be smarter than you!” But there is
a lot of superintelligence already. I would argue
that, for example, ChatGPT within the bounds of
its hallucinatory tendencies is superintelligent.
It has access to more information than I do. It's
really a question of how reliable it is. But let's
move on from that; you're very critical of the
Silicon Valley culture in the book. Can you talk
about that a little bit? I'm on the East Coast.
I'm not steeped in Silicon Valley culture but it
amazes me that you've got this concentration of
billionaires in and around San Francisco that are
creating superhuman technology, even if it's not
consistent or across all domains. Yet they live in
this– I'll probably get in trouble, but I lived in
the Bay Area for a while, but this real cesspool
of crime, homelessness, and social dysfunction.
And I keep on thinking, you know, I should email
Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos. I mean, between them,
they could solve the homelessness problem like
that, with a fraction of their wealth. Can
you talk a little bit about that dysfunction?
PEDRO:
So 2040, as the subtitle says,
is very much a satire of Silicon Valley and the
culture of Silicon Valley around tech and around
other things. It has several elements. One of
them is what you're referring to, which I'm always
struck by when I go there these days. There's such
a contrast between the utopian high tech side and
the dystopian. I mean, in San Francisco you see
the self-driving cars go by on Market Street,
or you're in one. Then behind them, you see these
homeless people injecting and lying sprawling on
the ground and piles of trash and poop. It makes
Neuromancer look like a children's story. It's
like, how could this happen? And again, part of
the goal of a satire, and this one in particular
is to say, if we let this go on, where is this
going to end and how do we stop it? So one of the
elements of the satire is– so there's this giant
company called Happinet, which is the ultimate
everything app, which exists in China and every US
tech billionaire wishes that’s what they had. It's
an app that does everything for you. And there's
the headquarters, which is this super high tower,
which is, of course, a caricature of the
Salesforce Tower, soaring high above the streets
in San Francisco. The CEO of this company looks
down on the masses and he says they're just pixels
and I can see the whole picture. Underground,
under San Francisco, there's a vast data center.
It's there to minimize latency and blah, blah.
But then Ethan, the protagonist– Ethan is the
CEO of this KumbAI startup that created PresiBot.
And at least in the beginning, he's the guy who
nominally controls it, then other things happen.
At one point he discovers that this underground
data center is full of homeless people squatting
there, because life is better there. It's not as
cold and it's more sheltered. And there are all
these robots so that the surveillance cameras
will not notice them. So again, there's multiple
layers of commentary in this but of course part of
the question is, how did we wind up here? And Dave
Neufeld, who's the CEO of this company, of course
he's inspired by the Elon Musks, Mark Zuckerbergs,
Jeff Bezos and whatnot of this world. You say
that they could solve the homelessness problem
with a stroke of the pen. Actually, it's much
more complicated than that. And again, as much as
it's a short book, I try to not oversimplify. The
homelessness problem in San Francisco and other
places does not exist because of lack of money to
solve it at all. Even without the billionaires,
we have put billions and billions of dollars in.
The problem only gets worse. It exists because,
again, we could go into that but it's more of a
political problem than a technical problem. Part
of what I spoof very much in this book is the
technical people's naive notion that all these
problems have tech solutions. The first chapter
is called “Optimize America!” because that's the
slogan of the PresiBot campaign. Then they very
quickly discover that things are a lot more
gnarly than that, if you will, and they are.
CRAIG:
Yeah. And when
I said they could solve it, I wrote a lot, when I
was at the Times, about the Housing First policy.
I don't know if you've read about it. This guy
Sam Tsemberis, who developed that during the
Carter administration in New York and it's been
implemented in some places very successfully.
The thing that really prevents it from being
implemented in larger cities is coordination
between and among institutions. You just can't
get everyone on the same page and as a result,
you end up with a fragmented system, and each
one is trying to address a different aspect
of the problem. But anyway, that's for another
conversation. I mean, my view is if they would
build housing for the homeless that would be
a leap toward a solution. And certainly the
tech billionaires have that money. You can't
get it politically because the politics are
so divisive that you can't come to a consensus.
Yeah, and Ethan lives in this tiny little flat,
which I thought was funny. That's more of a New
York trope to me than San Francisco. I mean,
San Francisco apartments are actually
larger than New York apartments.
PEDRO:
By the way, that was actually inspired by reality.
In particular, the apartment that he lives in
was inspired by a piece in 1843, The Economist
Lifestyle magazine, where they talked about and
they showed various ways in which San Francisco
is so expensive now that it's becoming like
Manhattan. And of course, it's also a tech Mecca.
So people are coming up with all of these ways to
make ever smaller apartments, have all the things
in them that you need, including beds that rise
into the ceiling and so on and so forth. And of
course, that's what I'm making fun of in Ethan's
apartment. Again, it's completely real, that part.
CRAIG:
Yeah.
The idea of technology as a decision maker
is something that interests me. With agentic,
which is a word I would
never have used a year ago–
PEDRO:
No one would have used it a year ago.
CRAIG:
That's right, models and with these reasoning
models with Q*, Strawberry, or GPT-5 or whatever
you want to call it, that next generation. The
idea of models that can make decisions and take
actions is becoming closer to reality. To me,
that's a very positive thing. In the book it's
sort of the door to all the craziness but how
do you feel about that? And I have a question
too, I had a conversation the other day about
truth and AI is a truth engine, which was
fascinating, but how do you feel about the
potential for agentic reasoning AI models to make
decisions? Maybe not autonomously, but certainly
to aid in making decisions with humans to avoid
some of the foibles that humans are prone to.
PEDRO:
AIs make decisions. That's what they've
done since the beginning. And there's a whole
theory which you study in AI 101 about how to
make decisions optimally and how to do search for
the best decisions, and etc. This is what classic
AI is about. If you went to an AI conference
in 1980, it was all about automated reasoning,
decision making, and planning and whatnot. Some
of that is not forgotten, unfortunately, but this
is what AI does. So AI isn't really AI until
it's making decisions about something. Now the
interesting questions are number one, decisions in
service of what goals? This is one of the crucial
things: the difference between AI and a computer
program is that the computer program at some level
doesn't make any decisions. It just does what
you told it to do in one situation or another.
The difference with AI is that it does make
its own decisions but they are guided by the
objectives that you put in. An AI system can never
do anything that is not by design subserving that
objective. So this is unintuitive and I understand
people's fears but you could actually have a
superintelligence that is vastly more intelligent
than us but you don't have to fear it because
it's at our service. The intelligence is just
doing our bidding. Now there's a second part,
which is, what happens when the AI starts
taking actions in the real world, say,
a robot versus ChatGPT. Now of course, there are
many risks that weren't there before. But again,
the bigger risk is that the AI will do damage.
A self-driving car might run somebody over,
right? The self-driving car is deciding
whether to go left, right, stop, or accelerate,
and it can make mistakes. So those are
the things that I think we need to fear;
and I think we see some of that. It's interesting
seeing how this is shifting, even in just the last
couple of years. We have a tendency, and the book
very much illustrates that, to prematurely put
faith in AI as being more capable than it really
is. Because again, the demos are very impressive,
it looks very intelligent; we're like, “Oh wow,
this AI is going to do all these things”. And then
it blows up in your face, or you can jailbreak
it and manipulate it. So the problem is not the
AI manipulating the humans, it's very much the
humans manipulating the AI. I think even from
just a year ago to now by interacting with things
like ChatGPT people are coming to see, which I
think is very healthy, AI as it really is and what
the real worries are versus the imaginary ones.
CRAIG:
Yeah. There’s a couple of things I wanted
to ask you that are sort of straying from the book
a little. I've talked to people who believe that
AI will be an arbiter of truth. I don't believe
that at all, because truth is so subjective. I
think the best that could happen is with a very
carefully constrained model, you could produce
evidence based consensus on any issue based on
the training data. How do you feel about that,
about using AI to settle questions where the
truth is unclear or hidden from a human observer?
PEDRO:
I wouldn't use the expression AI as an arbiter
of truth because arbiter is a very dangerous word.
I don't think AI can or will, or should have the
final say on what is the truth. Having said that,
AI can and should, and I hope will be a fantastic
tool to help us get closer to the truth. Very much
so, because it can gather and process evidence on
a larger scale than any human can. Again, in 2040
there are two versions of PresiBot: the first
version is ChatGPT, the second version, and more
interesting one, is a crowdsourced AI that in real
time takes input from people and decides what is
true, what to do, where to go, and whatnot. This,
I think is the real role of AI, is to increase
our collective intelligence and get us closer
to the truth. Now you can never get to the truth
because, this is one of the basic lessons in AI,
it doesn't matter how much computing power or
how much intelligence you have. Even just to
play the game of chess optimally, you need
a computer bigger than the universe. Again,
this is part of people's failure of imagination.
It's like, “Oh, it's more intelligent than us,
therefore it's infinitely intelligent.” This is a
complete mistake between our intelligence and God,
there's a vast, vast, vast gap. And yes, AI
will go beyond us, but AI is not going to do
miracles. Now, unfortunately, what is happening
right now is that AI, instead of getting us
closer to the truth, is actually arguably
getting us farther from the truth. Because,
what happens with all the generative AI is that
it makes stuff up. That's what generative means,
it means making stuff up. So what it's creating
is these deep fakes; and even like the problem
with ChatGPT, which you alluded to, that it's
unreliable, ChatGPT, these LLMs literally have
no notion of what is the truth. They just generate
text that makes people happy and that is similar
to what the text that people have generated. That
in fact does not get us closer to the truth. It's
actually completely ungrounded, and not completely
because that language, at least some of it comes
from, say, good reporting and so on. But most of
it doesn't and ChatGPT can't tell the difference.
CRAIG:
Yeah. And right now it's purely probabilistic.
So if there isn't a probability curve that centers
on a consensus about an issue it'll come up with
its own based on whatever distribution is in the
training data. If you had clean enough training
data, presumably that covered enough of the
world or intellectual thought, it would give
the consensus on any issue. I mean, you were
talking before about the second iteration of
PresiBot which is crowdsourced. The problem with
the training data that is being used in a lot of
these models, it's effectively crowdsourced,
but the crowd is unreliable because there's
probably more unintelligence within the crowd
than there is intelligence for the AI to draw
on. But I'm fascinated by the idea that you could,
either through careful curation of training data,
come up with a system that could reliably answer
questions that are facing humans or governments
in real time. PresiBot and PresiBot 2 aside,
is that something that you think is possible?
PEDRO:
It's possible. And here's the big
difference, at least one big difference between
1.0 and 2.0 is that PresiBot 1.0, like ChatGPT,
it is learned from past data and that data by
definition is stale not only because time has
passed but because you are not, ChatGPT,
is now answering something that it hasn't
answered before. It's a new dialogue, PrisiBot
is in a new situation. Then what it has to do,
and this is really the crucial point, is that it
has to generalize to the new situation from the
ones that are in the text. And the more different
they are, the worse it gets. This is also true of
humans but humans are much better at generalizing
from their experience to new situations than the
best machine learning algorithms that we have
today. Hopefully we will get better algorithms.
That's what I work on for a living, if you will.
You're right, it's also crowdsourcing in the sense
that it came from people but this is crowdsourcing
in real time. Meaning, when there's a situation,
what PresiBot 2.0 does, and actually technically
today this is possible, it listens to millions of
people saying what they know, what they believe,
what should happen, and making suggestions;
there are several examples of this in the book. So
this can actually work much, much better because
it's taking input from our human intelligences
in the moment about the actual situation,
about doing some very far fetched thing that
will be unreliable and prone to hallucination and
whatnot. I think there's a lot to do to perfect
that. But this is very much a possibility and a
very good one that is being very neglected right
now. And it's not just at the level of a president
of the United States, the level of a company.
Again, the company that created PresiBot was
created as a demo to then tell CEOs to companies.
If you think about the job of a company or the
CEO of a company, a lot of the decisions are very
mundane, but it's screwing up all the time because
it needs to do this for the customer, it needs
this knowledge that actually somebody else has,
but I don't even know that it has, and I'm
handing it off from one customer service rep
to another to the chat bot, there's this hell
that people live in and AI can overcome that.
CRAIG:
Yeah. Do you think that
the risks that AI governance, and we've seen as
I said, a lot of activity, the Europeans are,
are working hard to protect the consumers
and the US is relying more on existing
institutions. Do you think that the governance
is keeping up? One of the themes in the book is
that the race for innovation in Silicon
Valley is throwing us blindly into danger.
But I kind of think that the regulation is
a pretty fast follower. What do you think?
PEDRO:
Where to start? One of the central
plot elements in 2040 is PresiBot’s panic button.
The panic button is the kill switch of the AI, and
this is a real thing. People have proposed having
kill switches, there are research papers on having
kill switches, I would not be surprised at all if
a bunch of regulations in various countries demand
kill switches. So Presibot has a kill switch which
is in the hands of Ethan, the CEO of the company,
then Ethan loses the kill switch and then the fun
begins. Again, there is a fun element to that,
of course, of the chaos that ensues and the
people fighting over it and so on. But this
is making a real point, the point is, these
measures that you put in place to make AI safe,
if you're not careful, make it less safe. Kill
switches are a great example of that. Kill switch
is like the ultimate guarantee against Terminator,
but actually it's nothing of the kind. It's just
another vector by which chaos can come in. Let
me put it this way: the real problem in AI is
who controls it. The kill switch in a way is the
embodiment of that in 2040. Then the realization
that he has is, instead of having people fight
over the kill switch, I should give everybody one
because this is a democracy. So the kill switch
originally is an app that Arvind, the CTO, and his
friend coded up quickly that literally has a red
button that you push or that you can use to talk
through PresiBot. What they do, because they're
very short of time, they call it the PresiApp,
they create PresiApp and anybody can push the
button and talk into PresiApp. Then of course
the interesting question becomes, when there's 20
or 100 million people talking into PresiBot at the
same time, what does the AI do? And you alluded
to, it will reflect the consensus view. Well,
maybe when there's a consensus but often
the problem is that there is no consensus.
CRAIG:
Yeah, or
that the consensus is misguided as we saw,
I don't know how you feel– with Brexit.
PEDRO:
Actually,
Brexit is a great example. So Brexit actually won
by a fairly slim margin. If the bunch of people
who didn't bother to vote, particularly the young
people, had bothered to vote, it would have gone
in a different direction. Today there's a great
majority, 60 something percent, last that I saw,
or something in that range, of British people who
regret Brexit. I would say that one of the primary
roles of AI, and again this is what we do in
machine learning, is to try to see ahead. Try to
guide us, not decide for us, but say, [Look, this
is what you want and you think that Brexit will
give it to you. Here's maybe why it won't– “We
want to deregulate Britain and be free from all
the European Union red tape.”] We knew that wasn't
going to happen. [We want to stem immigration and
whatnot], there's less immigration from Europe,
there's more from other sides. So that's why
it has turned out badly. But good AI could
actually have seen this and among other things,
alerted people to this. Another thing that I think
should happen, and again, the book alludes to,
is people often don't have time for politics even
though it's very important. But you could deputize
your model to represent you. Your model, with your
authorization, based on whatever data you want,
is a better representative of you for the decision
making than your member of Parliament or your
member of Congress. For two reasons: one is that
it doesn't have the cognitive limitations that the
members of Congress do. But even more important,
it doesn't have conflicts of interest. So you can
have, instead of 400 people deciding for the 300
million of us, what you can have is 300 million
models that will have a much more interesting
argument going back and forth about any issue that
you care to decide about. I think we're going
to look back on what we have today as barbarism.
CRAIG:
Yeah, I agree. And that's actually to
the idea of a truth engine. Right now, the models,
you can easily manipulate them through prompts to
say anything you want. But if you had a hundred
flowers blooming, to use the Maoist phrase,
and all of these AIs debating to the point of
convergence, maybe that's the closest you could
get to optimal decision making or the truth. I saw
a survey recently about how public perception of
AI is at an all time low. I mean, in the short
time that people have been thinking about it,
because their experience of it has been
frustrating and glitchy and layered on
top is all of the alarmist media. In the way that
social media insinuated itself into society, in a
way that a lot of people didn't understand while
it was happening, and now everyone recognizes
the evils, frankly, of social media, the way it's
managed today; how do you see AI integrating into
society, because I see the same thing? I mean,
you think about it, a lot of the people I talk to
think about it. But I go camping upstate with some
buddies who are construction workers or that sort
of thing, and they have no clue. And frankly, they
don't want to know but I keep telling them this
stuff, it's going to impact your life or at least
your children's lives. So, are you optimistic
about that integration? Certainly in the book it
doesn't paint a very optimistic picture. What do
you think has to happen for it to integrate
in a healthier way than social media did?
PEDRO:
I think the first thing that people should
realize is that AI has been part of their lives
for decades now. The most important application of
AI in the world today, by far, is not chatbots.
Chatbots, for the most part are entertainment
or they do mundane things like generate vacuous
text or text that doesn't need to have a very
high standard, etc. The most important application
of AI today is things like recommendation systems.
It's making choices for you from the vastness of
the infosphere, it's giving you search results,
choosing movies and books and music and
whatnot for you to consume, its Amazon product
recommendations, the tweets that you see, the
posts on on social media, they are all selected
for you by AI. So I'm not surprised that people
have this negative view of AI right now because
most people have only recently become aware
of AI. And what they see, as you say, is,
on the one hand, the crap that it generates, on
the other hand, all the alarmist fears. I think
the antidote for this, and I think it will happen
but we have to make it happen because as you say,
there are multiple forces pushing in the other
direction, people have to get to know AI better.
They are in some ways getting to know AI better.
For example, the incompetence AI actually runs
counter to the Terminator fears. Like, [oh, we
need a moratorium of AI before a disaster happens
now], is ridiculous. People are like, what?
ChatGPT? But we tend to veer between those two
poles; so we have to keep making a better. That's
for us, the engineers and the researchers. But
we also have to, in some ways, enlist people
to use AI for their benefit. This is how AI
can, should, and will permeate society. It’s not,
[We have disclosed AIs that belong to these large
companies that do a bunch of stuff under the
hood.] It's like a car shows up at your door
with no steering wheel and says, get in, I know
where you want to go. Wouldn't you rather drive
the car yourself? Well, in order to drive the car
yourself, you need two things. You need to demand
that the car have a steering wheel and pedals
because they're there, they're just not exposed
to you. So that's number one. Then number two, you
have to learn to drive. So this is what I want to
encourage people to do, is to demand a car with
a steering wheel. And number two: learn to drive.
CRAIG:
Although,
certain things will simply go away as obsolete or
interesting. When I hear people complain about AI,
“oh, I'm never going to use AI”, “I didn't
ask for it!”; you hear that all the time.
I always say, [Well, when was the last time you
used a paper map to get somewhere?] People don't
really understand that that's AI. In a way
that paper maps are pretty much obsolete now,
maybe steering wheels and accelerator and
brake pedals will be obsolete, I don't know.
As much as I enjoy driving, I can imagine a
day where driving is a little bit like people
that drive stick shift cars today. It's kind of
a choice that's unnecessary, but they enjoy it.
PEDRO:
Just to clarify, I wasn't literally talking about
self-driving cars. I understand the confusion, I
was using cars as a metaphor for control of AI.
CRAIG:
I see.
PEDRO:
I talk about this in my previous book,
The Master Algorithm. AIs have the equivalent
of a steering wheel, which is the objective
function. It's the metric that they're trying
to optimize. It's the means by which we control
AI. I think the discussion around AI should be
focused on what the metrics should be. Should
those metrics just be set by the company? Should
there be a component that is mandated by law to
be for the social good? There should definitely,
I think, be a major component, the biggest one,
which is under the control of you, the user.
So this is what I metaphorically mean by the
steering wheel of the AI. It's very good that
people are now aware of AI as AI. I think it's
incumbent on us, the experts to tell people
about what AI really is. At the end of the day,
to quote Karl Marx, it's all about who has the
power. AI will change society in the direction of
the people who use it better. So, you never asked
for AI but that is a very dangerous proposition.
It's like Henry Ford said, “If I had asked people
what they wanted, they would have asked for faster
horses.” Imagine trying to do anything with horses
today, competing with someone who has a car. So
we all need to start thinking about how to use
AI in our jobs to automate some of the tasks,
but not all, because that's usually what
happens with AI, in our private lives.
One of the biggest roles of AI today is in
recommending matches. There's people who were
born because they had matched parents. Two, as a
citizen, how can you use AI to inform you better,
to represent you in a lot of decision processes,
etc. Honestly, the people who do that will have
power and the ones who don't do that will not
have power. So which one do you want to be?
CRAIG:
Yeah, you're right.
If you were to sum up, what are
the three messages in your book?
PEDRO:
I would say that the first
message is that AI is PrisiBot, not Terminator.
When you think of AI think of an imperfect human
creation that is being debugged, that is a work in
progress. When you look at an AI, see through the
AI to the people controlling it. AI is like mirror
shades, you don't see the eyes behind it. You got
to think about the people staring at you on the
other side of the AI. That I think is the first
message and if people just get that one message,
that's already great. The second one, which
comes on the heels of that, is what PresiBot 2.0
illustrates. If you now think of I as an imperfect
artifact that is a collective creation of a bunch
of people, what do you want it to be? What do you
want to do with it? Let us start perfecting
democracy using AI. That's what PresiBot 2.0
on a good day, of course, some things do go wrong
because there's still pitfalls, is a better form
of democracy. It's overcoming this trade off
between representative and direct democracy. We
need to do that because autocracies are using AI
to perfect themselves. The third message I would
say is more to do, not with AI in particular but
with the tech world and with politics and what
not, which is there's you see this so much today,
and again, it’s one of my motivations for writing
the book, is that the tech people start out with
a very naive notion that this technology is going
to make the world better. And it's super naive, it
is. But then what happens, and the last five years
AI has just been hit with this, is that as soon as
the technology starts to make a difference in the
real world, everybody scrambles for control of it.
For example, there are a lot of people trying to
make, and this honestly chills my blood, trying
to make machine learning systems learn models
of what the world should be instead of what it
is like. People at Google do this right now.
They will alter, for example, the gender ratios
of professions and whatnot to make it look like
what the world should be, to make them, I'm
making up the example but it's a real one,
like 50% of programmers are women. I'm like, no,
the goal of the machine learning is to tell the
truth, going back to your earlier question. Then
on top of that, we can have whatever decision
processes and objectives we want, but do not
create an Orwellian world on the back of AI.
So it's very important that we be aware that this
is going on. Right now, AI's creating a world for
you that makes these choices and creates
an imaginary world that is different from
the real one. It's like 1984 but taken to a whole
different level. Again, if all that the book does
is make people aware of this and make them start
thinking about it, that's that's already great.
CRAIG:
Yeah. What are you working on now that the
book's out, or on its way out? Are you still doing
research? Are you going to become a novelist?
PEDRO:
I'm sadly not
going to become a novelist. This was more a fun
thing that I did on the side and also because I
thought it was worth it. But it was really, almost
like a hobby, I'm not a novelist. I know a lot of
artists that I have a lot of respect for. I'm more
of a scientist. I have more of an analytical mind
as opposed to a synthetic one. Part of what made
me write this book was that in an earlier time,
I actually learned to write science fiction.
I went to this famous thing called the Clarion
West Writers Workshop that a lot of the biggest
names in science fiction have come from. I know
the basics of how to write fiction. But at
the end of the day, I'm a scientist and my
main occupation in the last several years has
been doing research. This is what I'm spending
most of my time on. And going forward, this is
what I'm going to spend even more of my time on.
I intend to write more books; I have lots of
ideas for novels to write, but you’ve got to
prioritize. The books that I'm going to write
after this are going to be nonfiction ones. The
main thing that I'm working on right now, and have
been, is better learning algorithms, is better AI,
precisely AI that doesn't hallucinate. It's AI
that's reliable. It's AI that generalizes further
than the current AI can because maybe you're using
some of the things that people do. In particular,
going back to my previous book, The Master
Algorithm, I believe that to really solve
the AI problem, you really need to combine
the key ideas from the different paradigms,
the two main ones being symbolic AI which can
reason and neural networks which can do other
things but not reason. You really need a very
deep integration of them and I'm making very
good progress in that so we'll see where it goes.
Also, a lot of this was motivated by this dream,
if you will, that goes back 20 years that I
have of this crowdsourced AI, of this collective
intelligence, of mass collaboration supported by
AI. In order to do that, something like GPT is
not enough. We have technology to go way beyond
where we are today, but we do not quite have the
technology to go all the way, precisely because
people will contradict each other and there will
be a lot of crap, basically. And the AI needs to
know how to deal with that. Symbolic AI doesn't
know how to do that, but then the neural
AI doesn't know how to reason with that.
So we do need progress on a scientific level
to do this. But I think we're getting there.
CRAIG:
Yeah. And don't
you think that with all the hints coming out of
OpenAI that that's going to be their next model,
at least a step toward that,
that reasoning neural network?
PEDRO:
Great question. So I don't know what Q*
or Strawberry are. But knowing a bunch of people
at OpenAI, including some of the people working
on this, I think that very much trying to add
reasoning capabilities is the key direction to go,
and making the AI more reliable. They understand
this very well and they're working on it. Now,
what I see them doing, I don't think is going to
get them there. They have a particular type of
person in the company, very much the hacker type.
Again, this is what I'm making fun of in 2040,
is the hacker's thinking they're about to
solve AI by hacking. And hacking has a place,
the scaling and whatnot, it's not trivial
but I don't think you're going to get to this
kind of AI, AGI, superintelligence, or human
level AI, whatever you're going to call it,
just by tweaking transformers. The funny
thing is that Sam Altman also thinks that,
he just doesn't say that these days. But two
years ago– it's on the record of him saying [yeah,
I don't think transformers are going to do
it.] But of course, now he needs to sell what
he has. So I don't think that, for all their good
intentions, OpenAI is the most likely player to
get to this. They have some people. DeepMind
has more as a research lab. I think DeepMind
is vastly better than OpenAI and not even close.
But also, I think this is very neglected today:
the great majority of AI research today still
happens at universities. The Googles, the Metas,
and the Microsofts get all the publicity but if
you just look by the amount of research and in
particular you look at the research that is less
short term, it's overwhelmingly coming from the
universities. If I had to guess where this is
going to come from, for these various reasons,
it's probably not going to be one of those
labs; it's going to be some grad student.
CRAIG:
Yeah. Do
you follow Rich Sutton's work? He's
involved with John Carmack, the coder
from the gaming industry. He’s got a
startup called Keen. I'm just curious
whether you followed that. It's sort of trying
to get to AGI through reinforcement learning.
PEDRO:
So I have known Rich for
a long time. He's an interesting character. He’s,
of course, the most important person in the world
in reinforcement learning. When I was writing The
Master Algorithm, I actually asked a bunch of my
colleagues, so do you believe in this notion of
a master algorithm? The master algorithm is one
learning algorithm that can learn anything. And
there was a spectrum of opinion. People say [No,
that's never going to happen], to various ideas.
But the two people who most strongly believed in
the notion of the master algorithm
were Geoff Hinton and Rich Sutton.
CRAIG:
Oh!
PEDRO:
And this is not a coincidence.
They are the leaders of their schools of thought.
Of course, their idea of what the master algorithm
is was very different. The master algorithm for
the Rich is reinforcement learning. In fact,
in an early discussion that I had with him years
ago now, I was pointing out the thing about
reinforcement learning is that it's very intuitive
but it keeps not working. This has been the case
even now. DeepMind came to prominence with deep
reinforcement learning. But that actually hasn't
gone anywhere, unfortunately. I wish it had. So
kind of quizzed Rich about some of this. And he
said like, [Well, reinforcement learning doesn't
have to be that, it can be something else…]
And I'm like, sure, so what is reinforcement
learning? And Rich says, “It's whatever works”.
(both laugh)
PEDRO:
When something finally works,
he'll call it reinforcement learning, that's
okay. But that doesn't answer the question of
what to do now. To get more concretely to
what I think is their chances of success:
So there's the sequential decision making problem.
That's what human intelligence solves and that's
what AI has to solve, which is why I think a lot
of the people who do want to get to human level
AI are so attracted to reinforcement learning.
But reinforcement learning is one approach to
the problem of sequential decision making. At the
end of the day, I don't think– I could be wrong,
I don't think that's the solution because the
core of reinforcement learning is this notion
that you make some decisions now and then you only
get rewards much later. Like I make a move in the
game of Go and then only 100 moves later do I win
or lose the game. The whole idea of reinforcement
learning is to propagate that result back to the
present time. But what has happened over and over
again since the 80s, since the field began, is
one of two things: either the rewards are fairly
frequent and close to your actions, and in that
case you don't need reinforcement learning because
you can just do supervised learning. Every time
we see a success of reinforcement learning, most
recently with the things like training chatbots
to give answers that people like, so-called
reinforcement learning from human feedback, it
immediately turns out that actually this was just
supervised learning or you could do just as well
as with supervised learning. Or, if the rewards
truly are delayed and sparse, it just doesn't
work. So I'm waiting for Rich to solve that
problem. I hope that he does but so far I haven't
seen anything to convince me. Of course, there's
also his famous paper about the bitter lesson that
day what really works is more data and scaling,
which I think is not the complete truth but it's
a very interesting statement coming from him.
CRAIG:
Well,
it got us ChatGPT which blew everybody's mind.
PEDRO:
Well, but here's the thing,
this is a misunderstanding that people have
that is a very natural one. Scaling was one
of the things that got us ChatGPT. Before OpenAI,
and actually Google before them and then Sundar
screwed up, but that's another story, before the
whole run to scale up happened, which is what is
happening now and I'm all for, there were a whole
series of things that had to happen such that
then, scaling is the last element for this thing
to really take off. And really those things were
much more important than– actually even scaling,
you had to have GPUs, you had to have embeddings,
you had to have back propagation. The algorithm
that drives all of this, backpropagation,
was invented in the 80s by some definition, maybe
even earlier, by a psychologist modeling child
development and children's language learning.
So there's a whole series of things and it's
easy to say, [Oh, the scaling did it.] No, I spent
the first part of my career working on scaling and
then I realized mathematically that the algorithms
that we have, no matter how far we scale them,
will still not be that smart. So you got to have
the people working on scaling but you also got to
have the people developing the newer generation
of algorithms that you can then scale. A human
brain is not a scaled ant brain. So I think just
scaling counter that story of the bitter lesson,
isn't going to get us there. However, there is
an element of truth in it, which we have learned
repeatedly in AI: that what tends to work well,
and this is really the notion behind the master
algorithm, is actually, simple algorithms coupled
with a lot of data and a lot of compute. It's
amazing how powerful that is, as opposed to very
clever solutions designed by very clever people.